<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xml:lang="en-US" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Sparse Fourier Transform: Theory and Practice</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet.css"/>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml" href="../styles/page-template.xpgt"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="chno"><a id="page_191"/><b>12</b></p>
<p class="chtitle"><b>Conclusion</b></p>
<p class="noindent">The widespread use of the Fourier transform coupled with the emergence of big data applications has generated a pressing need for new algorithms that compute the Fourier transform in sublinear time, faster than the FFT algorithm. This book addresses this need by presenting the Sparse Fourier Transform algorithms and building practical systems that use these algorithms to solve key problems in the areas of wireless networks, mobile systems, computer graphics, medical imaging, biochemistry, and digital circuits.</p>
<p class="indent">The Sparse Fourier Transform algorithms are a family of sublinear time algorithms that leverage the sparsity of the signals in the frequency domain to compute the Fourier transform faster than the FFT. We present state-of-the-art algorithms with the lowest runtime complexity known to date. Specifically, these algorithms run in <i>O</i>(<i>k</i> log <i>n</i>) time for exactly sparse signals and <i>O</i>(<i>k</i> log <i>n</i> log (<i>n/k</i>)) time for approximately sparse signals. The algorithms are faster than FFT, which has a runtime of <i>O</i>(<i>n</i> log <i>n</i>), for any sparsity <i>k</i> = <i>o</i>(<i>n</i>). We also present algorithms with the <i>optimal</i> sampling complexity for average case inputs. These algorithms use the minimum number of input samples, i.e., <i>O</i>(<i>k</i>) samples for exactly sparse signals and <i>O</i>(<i>k</i> log <i>n</i>) samples for approximately sparse signals, and hence reduce acquisition cost.</p>
<p class="indent">This book also develops software and hardware systems that leverage the Sparse Fourier Transform to address challenges in practical applications. Specifically, in the area of wireless networks, we show how to use commodity hardware to build a wireless receiver that captures GHz-wide signals that are 6&#215; larger than its digital sampling rate. We also show how to design a GPS receiver that consumes 2&#215; lower power on mobile systems. In the area of computer graphics, we demonstrate that reconstructing light field images using the Sparse Fourier Transform reduces sampling requirements and improves image reconstruction quality. We also show how the Sparse Fourier Transform can be used to generate clearer MRS images while reducing the time the patient spends in an MRI machine. In the area of biochemistry, we demonstrate that the Sparse Fourier Transform can reduce an NMR experiment time by 16&#215;. Finally, we present a Sparse Fourier Transform <a id="page_192"/>chip that delivers the largest Fourier transform chip to date for sparse data while consuming 40&#215; less power than traditional FFT chips.</p>
<p class="indent">This book lays the foundational grounds of the Sparse Fourier Transform. It develops a theoretical and practical framework which researchers can use and build on to improve the performance of their specific applications.</p>
<p class="h1"><b><a id="ch12_1"/><span class="big">12.1</span>&#160;&#160;Future Directions</b></p>
<p class="noindent">Looking forward, the Sparse Fourier Transform can help address further challenges in building practical systems that benefit many more applications, beyond what has been demonstrated in this book. Below we highlight some of the future applications of the Sparse Fourier Transform.</p>
<p class="hang"><b>Discovering the Brain&#8217;s Connectivity.</b> Understanding the structure and function of the connections between neurons in the brain is a major ongoing research project. High-dimensional MRI tests like 6D diffusion MRI enable discovering the communication channels between different parts of the brain. However, going to higher dimensions requires collecting more data, which translates into the patient spending much longer time in the MRI machine. Similar to MRS, diffusion MRI data is sparse in the frequency domain. Hence, the Sparse Fourier Transform can help enable high-dimensional MRI tests using very few subsamples of the data to reduce the time the patient spends in the machine.</p>
<p class="hang"><b>Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT).</b> OCT is an established medical imaging technique that uses optical scattering in biological tissues to provide diagnostic images of the eye, the retina, the coronary arteries, the face, and the finger tips. OCT generates a lot of data which makes it difficult to provide the images to doctors in real time. However, OCT images are generated in the frequency domain which is typically sparse and hence can benefit from the Sparse Fourier Transform to quickly process the data and generate the medical images in real time.</p>
<p class="hang"><b>DNA Sequencing.</b> The post processing of DNA sequencing data is typically very computational intensive and there are many attempts in computational biology to create faster processing tools. Applications like antibody sequence alignment require finding the right genes that match the DNA sequence and discovering where each gene starts in the sequence. This problem is very similar to the GPS code alignment problem from <a href="18_Chapter08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a> and hence it can benefit from the Sparse Fourier Transform to speed up the sequence alignment problem.</p>
<p class="hang"><a id="page_193"/><b>Radio Astronomy.</b> The Square Kilometer Array (SKA) is a radio telescope in development in Australia and South Africa. It spreads over an area of one square kilometer providing the highest-resolution images ever captured in astronomy. To generate images of the sky, SKA performs a Fourier transform over the sampled data. However, the amount of incoming data will be larger than terabytes per second which is hard to process with today&#8217;s computational power. The output images are sparse since at any point in time there are few events occurring in the universe. Thus, the Sparse Fourier Transform can help generate these images much faster than FFT which significantly reduces the required computational load.</p>
<p class="hang"><b>Wireless Localization.</b> Antenna arrays have become the key component in localizing RF devices in a variety of applications such as indoor navigationand location-based marketing. In these systems, a Fourier transform is computed across the samples from the antennas in order to identify the spatial direction along which a wireless signal arrives. Large antenna arrays provide high resolution in measuring the angle of arrival but are very costly since they require a large number of synchronized RF-receivers. The direction of arrival of wireless signals is typically sparse and hence we can use the Sparse Fourier Transform to subsample the antennas and reduce the number of receivers needed compute the direction of arrival.</p>
<p class="hang"><b>Radar Systems.</b> Radar chirps are signals in which the frequency sweeps over the bandwidth of operation during a given time period. Detecting and acquiring chirps transmitted by an unknown source is a challenging problem in radar. Since the parameters of the chirp are unknown, it is hard to capture the signal. For example, if we do not know the frequency which the chirp is sweeping, the chirp can be anywhere in a multi-GHz spectrum but only sweeping over few MHz of bandwidth. Moreover, if we do not know the sweeping function of chirp (e.g., the slope of linear sweep), we cannot pick the right time window over which we should perform the Fourier transform. Chirps, however, are extremely sparse in frequency domain. Exploiting this sparsity would allow us to design radar acquisition systems with lower computational overhead and the high accuracy.</p>
<p class="indentt">In addition to the above applications, the Sparse Fourier Transform can be leveraged to speed up processes like feature extraction in speech recognition, optical proximity correction (OPC) in computational lithography, seismic data analysis in oil and gas exploration, analysis of Boolean functions, proximity queries in databases, anomaly detection in data centers, as well as many more applications.</p>
</body>
</html>