<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>Preface</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="../css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<div epub:type="preface" role="doc-preface" aria-labelledby="preface">
<h1 class="cttitle" id="preface"><a id="page_xiii"/>Preface</h1>
<p class="tx">Imagine a world where every movement, heartbeat, and the blood composition of a person are measured continuously and recorded as events and event attributes. A healthy lunch with enough protein to fuel the body, a lengthy walk that reduces stress, a cookie that causes blood sugar to spike, and quality sleep that boosts the immune system are just a few examples of the innumerable events in the physical world that are ruled by cause-and-effect relationships. Each cause brings about a related effect, which in turn becomes a cause for another effect. Causality is universal. Each event causes consequent events and was caused by some earlier events. If we explore causality and answer explanatory questions, we might overcome many challenges around health and well-being, disease progression, equipment failure, societal problems, climatic conditions, and other system breakdowns. Recent years have seen progress in data science, storage, processing power, and wireless technology that has resulted in unprecedented focus being directed at addressing new challenges. Machine learning has become a dominant aspect of artificial intelligence (AI) in addressing and solving many current difficult problems. Machine learning can find patterns, correlations, and associations among different datasets. One of its limitations, however, has been in addressing problems that require attention to causality. A pressing question now is: How can we advance the state of the art in data science by bringing causal inference and big data analysis together?</p>
<p class="txi">Causal inference allows us to ask the &#x201C;what if&#x201D; questions. The major difficulty with causal inference is confounders. Confounders are variables that have an impact on the effect. For example, in a personal well-being situation, to answer the question of &#x201C;What happens to someone&#x2019;s sleep quality if they replace their afternoon coffee with green tea?&#x201D; There are many confounders for this situation, such as exercise habits, stress, and the quality of sleep the night before. Confounders are prevalent and complicate causal inference. In classical causal inference one should think about all the potential confounders, measure them, and estimate <a id="page_xiv"/>causal effects through an iterative process. There is a fundamental assumption here that is called <i>strong ignorability</i>&#x2014;meaning there is no unobserved confounder. What makes it more difficult is that the condition where one truly considered all confounders is untestable. Therefore, the classical causal inference rests on this untestable assumption that one has thought about all the confounders. This limits the applicability of causal inference considerably.</p>
<p class="txi">Cause-and-effect relationships often involve repeating patterns within the system and its components. Finding cause-and-effect patterns as repeated temporal and structural relationships between events is a sufficiently analogous proxy for causal relationships. It is a simple idea with powerful implications.</p>
<p class="txi">We believe that many existing and most emerging new applications require data streams and utilize predictive techniques to prevent undesirable events from happening and to enhance the experience of desirable events. The notion of events plays a key role in most of these applications. This book contributes toward advancing the emerging techniques in AI and machine learning to build explanatory models by discovering relationships among events. We call this iterative process event mining. It has two distinct phases: hypothesis formation and hypothesis testing. Hypothesis formation is a data-driven process that requires the analysis of a good deal of event data to find strong candidate hypotheses. Based on a domain expert&#x2019;s knowledge and judgment, one or more hypotheses are then formulated for further testing and verification. The results of event mining is an <i>explainable</i> model that explains causal relationships in the form of structural and temporal local patterns in the data. These models are the fundamental basis for guidance and control based on prediction. As we know, even ancient societies without powerful tools for data analysis and modeling were eager to develop techniques for prediction and subsequently developed astrology. Modern technology develops the rocket science behind advanced astronomical studies based on predictive models. The quest for predicting the future is never-ending.</p>
<p class="txi">This book is our explorations in event mining. We discuss how explanatory models are different from predictive models. We elaborate on the importance of an event language for transparent explanations rather than black box predictions. The definition of events from the physical world and cyber world perspectives have been a topic of research in many areas. This has resulted in defining event models from different perspectives. We discuss these and explain the required aspects of an event model that may be useful in event mining. Event mining relies on a flexible temporal knowledge representation, pattern definition with varying levels of complexity, and high-performance pattern discovery algorithms. We discuss the capabilities of different pattern discovery algorithms by considering a running <a id="page_xv"/>example related to the risk factors of asthma. Based on these and the requirements of applications, it is important to formulate the design principles of an event mining system, from fusing data from heterogeneous sources of information to reusable and extendable pattern mining operators and having a human-in-the-loop to leverage domain expert knowledge. To give readers a broad perspective on the importance of an event mining framework, this book reviews applications of event mining in healthcare and medicine, biological data analysis, predictive maintenance, business intelligence, and computer networks. To make things more concrete, we present an event mining system called <i>EventMiner</i>. It describes the computational framework needed to navigate the process of building explanatory models. This includes the definition of suitable time and event models, a set of operators, and a high-level language to define arbitrarily complex event patterns. Furthermore, it highlights two case studies on using <i>EventMiner</i> for practical applications: asthma risk management and building personal models called Objective Self. Finally, we discuss some of the open challenges and opportunities in this important topic.</p>
<p class="txi">It is our sincere hope that our passion will inspire a deep sense of curiosity and wonderment toward the exciting challenges of event mining and event-based frameworks.</p>
<p class="tx1"><b>Laleh Jalali and Ramesh Jain</b>, December 2020<a id="page_xvi"/></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
